<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Adventures of a Cobblestone</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="adventures-of-a-cobblestone" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Adventures of a Cobblestone</h2>
			<p>There was in the town a cobbled roadway. A wheel of a passing cart loosened one of the stones. The stone said to himself, “Why should I lie here close packed with others of my kind? I will live separately.”</p>
			<p>A boy came along and picked up the cobblestone.</p>
			<p>Thought the stone to himself: “I wanted to travel and I travel. I only had to wish sufficiently strongly.”</p>
			<p>The boy threw the stone at a house. Thought the stone: “I wish to fly and I fly. It’s quite simple⁠—I just willed it.”</p>
			<p>Bang went the stone against the window- glass. The glass broke and in doing so cried out:</p>
			<p>“Oh, you scoundrel! What are you doing?”</p>
			<p>But the stone replied:</p>
			<p>“You’d have done better to get out of the way. I don’t like people getting in my way. Everything arranged for my benefit⁠—that’s my motto.”</p>
			<p>The stone fell on a soft bed and thought: “I’ve flown a bit, and now I’ll lie down for a while and rest.”</p>
			<p>A servant came and took the stone off the bed and threw it out at the window again so that it fell back on the cobbled roadway.</p>
			<p>Then the stone cried out to his fellow- cobbles: “Brothers, good health, I’ve just been paying a call at one of the mansions, but I did not at all care for the aristocracy, my heart yearned for the common people, so I returned.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
