<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Captive Death</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="captive-death" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Captive Death</h2>
			<p>A long time ago there lived a brave and invincible Knight.</p>
			<p>One day he happened to capture Death herself.</p>
			<p>He brought her to his strong castle, and put her in a cell.</p>
			<p>Death sat there⁠—and people ceased to die.</p>
			<p>The Knight was overjoyed, and thought:</p>
			<p>“Now it is well, but it is rather a worry to keep a watch on her. Perhaps it would be better to destroy her altogether.”</p>
			<p>But the Knight was a very just man⁠—he could not kill her without judgment.</p>
			<p>He went to the cell, and, pausing before the small window, he said:</p>
			<p>“Death, I want to cut your head off⁠—you’ve done a lot of harm upon the earth.”</p>
			<p>But Death was silent.</p>
			<p>The Knight continued:</p>
			<p>“I’ll give you a chance⁠—defend yourself if you can. What have you to say for yourself?”</p>
			<p>And Death answered:</p>
			<p>“I’ll say nothing just yet; let Life put in a word for me.”</p>
			<p>And the Knight suddenly saw Life standing beside him; she was a robust and red-checked but expressionless woman.</p>
			<p>And she began to say such brazen and ungodly things that the brave, invincible Knight trembled, and made haste to open the cell.</p>
			<p>Death went out⁠—and men began to die once more. The Knight himself died when his time came⁠—and he told no one upon the earth what that expressionless, brazen woman, Life, had said to him.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
