<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Light and Shadows</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="light-and-shadows" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Light and Shadows</h2>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Volodya Lovlev, a pale meagre lad of twelve, had returned home from school and was waiting for his dinner. He was standing in the drawing-room at the piano, and was turning over the pages of the latest number of the <i>Niva</i> which had come only that morning.</p>
				<p>A leaflet of thin grey paper fell out; it was an announcement issued by an illustrated journal. It enumerated the future contributors—the list contained about fifty well-known literary names; it praised at some length the journal as a whole and in detail its many-sidedness, and it presented several specimen illustrations.</p>
				<p>Volodya began to turn the pages of the leaflet in an absent way and to look at the miniature pictures. His large eyes, looked wearily out of his pale face.</p>
				<p>One page suddenly caught his attention, and his wide eyes opened slightly wider. Running from top to bottom were six drawings of hands throwing shadows in dark silhouette upon a white wall—the shadows representing the head of a girl with an amusing three-cornered hat, the head of a donkey, of a bull, the sitting figure of a squirrel, and other similar things.</p>
				<p>Volodya smiled and looked very intently at them. He was quite familiar with this amusement. He could hold the fingers of one hand so as to cast a silhouette of a hare's head on the wall. But this was quite another matter, something that Volodya had not seen before; its interest for him was that here were quite complex figures cast by using both hands.</p>
				<p>Volodya suddenly wished to reproduce these shadows. Of course there was no use trying now, in the uncertain light of a late autumn afternoon.</p>
				<p>He had better try it later in his own room. In any case, it was of no use to any one.</p>
				<p>Just then he heard the approaching footsteps and voice of his mother. He flushed for some reason or other and quickly put the leaflet into his pocket, and left the piano to meet her. She looked at him with a caressing smile as she came toward him; her pale, handsome face greatly resembled his, and she had the same large eyes.</p>
				<p>She asked him, as she always did: "Well, what's the news to-day?"</p>
				<p>"There's nothing new," said Volodya dejectedly.</p>
				<p>But it occurred to him at once that he was being ungracious, and he felt ashamed. He smiled genially and began to recall what had happened at school; but this only made him feel sadder.</p>
				<p>"Pruzhinin has again distinguished himself," and he began to tell about the teacher who was disliked by his pupils for his rudeness. "Lentyev was reciting his lesson and made a mess of it, and so Pruzhinin said to him: 'Well, that's enough; sit down, blockhead!'"</p>
				<p>"Nothing escapes you," said his mother, smiling.</p>
				<p>"He's always rude."</p>
				<p>After a brief silence Volodya sighed, then complained: "They are always in a hurry."</p>
				<p>"Who?" asked his mother.</p>
				<p>"I mean the masters. Every one is anxious to finish his course quickly and to make a good show at the examination. And if you ask a question you are immediately suspected of trying to take up the time until the bell rings, and to avoid having questions put to you."</p>
				<p>"Do you talk much after the lessons?"</p>
				<p>"Well, yes—but there's the same hurry after the lessons to get home, or to study the lessons in the girls' class-rooms. And everything is done in a hurry—you are no sooner done with the geometry than you must study your Greek."</p>
				<p>"That's to keep you from yawning."</p>
				<p>"Yawning! I'm more like a squirrel going round on its cage-wheel. It's exasperating."</p>
				<p>His mother smiled lightly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>After dinner Volodya went to his room to prepare his lessons. His mother saw that the room was comfortable, that nothing was lacking in it. No one ever disturbed Volodya here; even his mother refrained from coming in at this time. She would come in later, to help Volodya if he needed help.</p>
				<p>Volodya was an industrious and even a clever pupil. But he found it difficult to-day to apply himself. No matter what lesson he tried he could not help remembering something unpleasant; he would recall the teacher of each particular subject, his sarcastic or rude remark, which propped in passings had entered in the impressionable boy's mind.</p>
				<p>Several of his recent lessons happened to turn out poorly; the teachers appeared dissatisfied, and they grumbled incessantly. Their mood communicated itself to Volodya, and his books and copy-books inspired him at this moment with a deep confusion and unrest.</p>
				<p>He passed hastily from the first lesson to the second and to the third; this bother with trifles for the sake of not appearing "a blockhead" the next day seemed to him both silly and unnecessary. The thought perturbed him. He began to yawn from tedium and from sadness, and to dangle his feet impatiently; he simply could not sit still.</p>
				<p>But he knew too well that the lessons must be learnt, that this was very important, that his future depended upon it; and so he went on conscientiously with the tedious business.</p>
				<p>Volodya made a blot on the copy-book, and he put his pen aside. He looked at the blot, and decided that it could be erased with a penknife. He was glad of the distraction.</p>
				<p>Not finding the penknife on the table he put his hand into his pocket and rummaged there. Among all such rubbish as is to be found in a boy's pocket he felt his penknife and pulled it out, together with some sort of leaflet.</p>
				<p>He did not see at first what the paper was he held in his hands, but on looking at it he suddenly remembered that this was the little book with the shadows, and quite as suddenly he grew cheerful and animated.</p>
				<p>And there it was—that same little leaflet which he had forgotten when he began his lessons.</p>
				<p>He jumped briskly off his chair, moved the lamp nearer the wall, looked cautiously at the closed door—as though afraid of some one entering—and, turning the leaflet to the familiar page, began to study the first drawing with great intentness, and to arrange his fingers according to directions. The first shadow came out as a confused shape, not at all what it should have been. Volodya moved the lamp, now here, now there; he bent and he stretched his fingers; and he was at last rewarded by seeing a woman's head with a three-cornered hat.</p>
				<p>Volodya grew cheerful. He inclined his hand somewhat and moved his fingers very slightly—the head bowed, smiled, and grimaced amusingly.</p>
				<p>Volodya proceeded with the second figure, then with the others. All were hard at the beginning, but he managed them somehow in the end.</p>
				<p>He spent a half-hour in this occupation, and forgot all about his lessons, the school, and the whole world.</p>
				<p>Suddenly he heard familiar footsteps behind the door. Volodya flushed; he stuffed the leaflet into his pocket and quickly moved the lamp to its place, almost overturning it; then he sat down and bent over his copy-book. His mother entered.</p>
				<p>"Let's go and have tea, Volodenka," she said to him.</p>
				<p>Volodya pretended that he was looking at the blot and that he was about to open his penknife. His mother gently put her hands on his head. Volodya threw the knife aside and pressed his flushing face against his mother. Evidently she noticed nothing, and this made Volodya glad. Still, he felt ashamed, as though he had actually been caught at some stupid prank.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>The samovar stood upon the round table in the dining-room and quietly hummed its garrulous song. The hanging-lamp diffused its light upon the white tablecloth and upon the dark walls, filling the room with dream and mystery.</p>
				<p>Volodya's mother seemed wistful as she leant her handsome, pale face forward over the table. Volodya was leaning on his arm, and was stirring the small spoon in his glass. It was good to watch the tea's sweet eddies and to see the little bubbles rise to the surface. The little silver spoon quietly tinkled.</p>
				<p>The boiling water, sputtering, ran from the tap into his mother's cup.</p>
				<p>A light shadow was cast by the little spoon upon the saucer and the tablecloth, and it lost itself in the glass of tea. Volodya watched it intently: the shadows thrown by the tiny little eddies and bubbles recalled something to him—precisely what, Volodya could not say. He held up and he turned the little spoon, and he ran his fingers over it—but nothing came of it.</p>
				<p>"All the same," he stubbornly insisted to himself, "it's not with fingers alone that shadows can be made. They are possible with anything. But the thing is to adjust oneself to one's material."</p>
				<p>And Volodya began to examine the shadows of the samovar, of the chairs, of his mother's head, as well as the shadows cast on the table by the dishes; and he tried to catch a resemblance in all these shadows to something. His mother was speaking—Volodya was not listening properly.</p>
				<p>"How is Lesha Sitnikov getting on at school?" asked his mother.</p>
				<p>Volodya was studying then the shadow of the milk-jug. He gave a start, and answered hastily: "It's a tom-cat."</p>
				<p>"Volodya, you must be asleep," said his astonished mother. "What tom-cat?" Volodya grew red.</p>
				<p>"I don't know what's got into my head," he said. "I'm sorry, mother, I wasn't listening."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>The next evening, before tea, Volodya again thought of his shadows, and gave himself up to them. One shadow insisted on turning out badly, no matter how hard he stretched and bent his fingers.</p>
				<p>Volodya was so absorbed in this that he did not hear his mother coming. At the creaking of the door he quickly put the leaflet into his pocket and turned away, confused, from the wall. But his mother was already looking at his hands, and a tremor of fear lit up her eyes.</p>
				<p>"What are you doing, Volodya? What have you hidden?"</p>
				<p>"Nothing, really," muttered Volodya, flushing and changing colour rapidly.</p>
				<p>It flashed upon her that Volodya wished to smoke, and that he had hidden a cigarette.</p>
				<p>"Volodya, show me at once what you are hiding," she said in a frightened voice.</p>
				<p>"Really, mamma...."</p>
				<p>She caught Volodya by the elbow.</p>
				<p>"Must I feel in your pocket myself?"</p>
				<p>Volodya grew even redder, and pulled the little book out of his pocket.</p>
				<p>"Here it is," he said, giving it to his mother.</p>
				<p>"Well, what is it?"</p>
				<p>"Well, here," he explained, "on this side are the drawings, and here, as you see, are the shadows. I was trying to throw them on the wall, and I haven't succeeded very well."</p>
				<p>"What is there to hide here!" said his mother, becoming more tranquil. "Now show me what they look like."</p>
				<p>Volodya, taken aback, began obediently to show his mother the shadows.</p>
				<p>"Now this is the profile of a bald-headed man. And this is the head of a hare."</p>
				<p>"And so this is how you are studying your lessons!"</p>
				<p>"Only for a little, mother."</p>
				<p>"For a little! Why are you blushing then, my dear? Well, I shan't say anything more. I think I can depend on you to do what is right."</p>
				<p>His mother moved her hand over his short, bristling hair, whereupon Volodya laughed and hid his flushing face under his mother's elbow.</p>
				<p>Then his mother left him, and for a long time Volodya felt awkward and ashamed. His mother had caught him doing something that he himself would have ridiculed had he caught any of his companions doing it.</p>
				<p>Volodya knew that he was a clever lad, and he deemed himself serious; and this was, after all, a game fit only for little girls when they got together.</p>
				<p>He pushed the little book with the shadows deeper into the table-drawer, and did not take it out again for more than a week; indeed, he thought little about the shadows that week. Only in the evening sometimes, in changing from one lesson to another, he would smile at the recollection of the girl in the hat—there were, indeed, moments when he put his hand in the drawer to get the little book, but he always quickly remembered the shame he experienced when his mother first found him out, and this made him resume his work at once.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>Volodya and his mother lived in their own house on the outskirts of the district town. Eugenia Stepanovna had been a widow for nine years. She was now thirty-five years old; she seemed young and handsome, and Volodya loved her tenderly. She lived entirely for her son, studied ancient languages for his sake, and shared all his school cares. A quiet and gentle woman, she looked somewhat apprehensively upon the world out of her large, benign eyes.</p>
				<p>They had one domestic. Praskovya was a widow; she was gruff, sturdy, and strong; she was forty-five years old, but in her stern taciturnity she was more like a woman a hundred years old.</p>
				<p>Whenever Volodya looked at her morose, stony face he wondered what she was thinking of in her kitchen during the long winter evenings, as the cold knitting-needles, clinking, shifted in her bony fingers with a regular movement, and her dry lips stirred yet uttered no sound. Was she recalling her drunken husband, or her children who had died earlier? or was she musing upon her lonely and homeless old age?</p>
				<p>Her stony face seemed hopelessly gloomy and austere.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>It was a long autumn evening. On the other side of the wall were the wind and the rain.</p>
				<p>How wearily, how indifferently the lamp flared! Volodya, propping himself up on his elbow, leant his whole body over to the left and looked at the white wall and at the white window-blinds.</p>
				<p>The pale flowers were almost invisible on the wall-paper ... the wall was a melancholy white....</p>
				<p>The shaded lamp subdued the bright glare of light. The entire upper portion of the room was twilit.</p>
				<p>Volodya lifted his right arm. A long, faintly outlined, confused shadow crept across the shaded wall.</p>
				<p>It was the shadow of an angel, flying heaven-ward from a depraved and afflicted world; it was a translucent shadow, spreading its broad wings and reposing its bowed head sadly upon its breast.</p>
				<p>Would not the angel, with his gentle hands, carry away with him something significant yet despised of this world?</p>
				<p>Volodya sighed. He let his arm fall languidly. He let his depressed eyes rest on his books.</p>
				<p>It was a long autumn evening.... The wall was a melancholy white.... On the other side of the wall something wept and rustled.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>Volodya's mother found him a second time with the shadows.</p>
				<p>This time the bull's head was a success, and he was delighted. He made the bull stretch out his neck, and the bull lowed.</p>
				<p>His mother was less pleased.</p>
				<p>"So this is how you are taking up your time," she said reproachfully.</p>
				<p>"For a little, mamma," whispered Volodya, embarrassed.</p>
				<p>"You might at least save this for a more suitable time," his mother went on. "And you are no longer a little boy. Aren't you ashamed to waste your time on such nonsense!"</p>
				<p>"Mamma, dear, I shan't do it again."</p>
				<p>But Volodya found it difficult to keep his promise. He enjoyed making shadows, and the desire to make them came to him often, especially during an uninteresting lesson.</p>
				<p>This amusement occupied much of his time on some evenings and interfered with his lessons. He had to make up for it afterwards and to lose some sleep. How could he give up his amusement?</p>
				<p>Volodya succeeded in evolving several new figures, and not by means of the fingers alone. These figures lived on the wall, and it even seemed to Volodya at times that they talked to him and entertained him.</p>
				<p>But Volodya was a dreamer even before then.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-8" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>It was night. Volodya's room was dark. He had gone to bed but he could not sleep. He was lying on his back and was looking at the ceiling.</p>
				<p>Some one was walking in the street with a lantern. His shadow traversed the ceiling, among the red spots of light thrown by the lantern. It was evident that the lantern swung in the hands of the passer-by—the shadow wavered and seemed agitated.</p>
				<p>Volodya felt a sadness and a fear. He quickly pulled the bed-cover over his head, and, trembling in his haste, he turned on his right side and began to encourage himself.</p>
				<p>He then felt soothed and warm. His mind began to weave sweet, naïve fancies, the fancies which visited him usually before sleep.</p>
				<p>Often when he went to bed he felt suddenly afraid; he felt as though he were becoming smaller and weaker. He would then hide among the pillows, and gradually became soothed and loving, and wished his mother were there that he might put his arms round her neck and kiss her.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-9" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p>The grey twilight was growing denser. The shadows merged. Volodya felt depressed. But here was the lamp. The light poured itself on the green tablecloth, the vague, beloved shadows appeared on the wall.</p>
				<p>Volodya suddenly felt glad and animated, and made haste to get the little grey book. The bull began to low ... the young lady to laugh uproariously.... What evil, round eyes the bald-headed gentleman was making!</p>
				<p>Then he tried his own. It was the steppe. Here was a wayfarer with his knapsack. Volodya seemed to hear the endless, monotonous song of the road....</p>
				<p>Volodya felt both joy and sadness.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h3>
				<p>"Volodya, it's the third time I've seen you with the little book. Do you spend whole evenings admiring your fingers?"</p>
				<p>Volodya stood uneasily at the table, like a truant caught, and he turned the pages of the leaflet with hot fingers.</p>
				<p>"Give it to me," said his mother.</p>
				<p>Volodya, confused, put out his hand with the leaflet. His mother took it, said nothing, and went out; while Volodya sat down over his copy-books.</p>
				<p>He felt ashamed that, by his stubbornness, he had offended his mother, and he felt vexed that she had taken the booklet from him; he was even more vexed at himself for letting the matter go so far. He felt his awkward position, and his vexation with his mother troubled him: he had scruples in being angry with her, yet he couldn't help it. And because he had scruples he felt even more angry.</p>
				<p>"Well, let her take it," he said to himself at last, "I can get along without it."</p>
				<p>And, in truth, Volodya had the figures in his memory, and used the little book merely for verification.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h3>
				<p>In the meantime his mother opened the little book with the shadows—and became lost in thought.</p>
				<p>"I wonder what's fascinating about them?" she mused. "It is strange that such a good, clever boy should suddenly, become wrapped up in such nonsense! No, that means it's not mere nonsense. What, then, is it?" she pursued her questioning of herself.</p>
				<p>A strange fear took possession of her; she felt malignant toward these black pictures, yet quailed before them.</p>
				<p>She rose and lighted a candle. She approached the wall, the little grey book still in her hand, and paused in her wavering agitation.</p>
				<p>"Yes, it is important to get to the bottom of this," she resolved, and began to reproduce the shadows from the first to the last.</p>
				<p>She persisted most patiently with her hands and her fingers, until she succeeded in reproducing the figure she desired. A confused, apprehensive feelings stirred within her. She tried to conquer it. But her fear fascinated her as it grew stronger. Her hands trembled, while her thought, cowed by life's twilight, ran on to meet the approaching sorrows.</p>
				<p>She suddenly heard her son's footsteps. She trembled, hid the little book, and blew out the candle.</p>
				<p>Volodya entered and stopped in the doorway, confused by the stern look of his mother as she stood by the wall in a strange, uneasy attitude.</p>
				<p>"What do you want?" asked his mother in a harsh, uneven voice.</p>
				<p>A vague conjecture ran across Volodya's mind, but he quickly repelled it and began to talk to his mother.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-12" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p>Then Volodya left her.</p>
				<p>She paced up and down the room a number of times. She noticed that her shadow followed her on the floor, and, strange to say, it was the first time in her life that her own shadow had made her uneasy. The thought that there was a shadow assailed her mind unceasingly—and Eugenia Stepanovna, for some reason, was afraid of this thought, and even tried not to look at her shadow.</p>
				<p>But the shadow crept after her and taunted her. Eugenia Stepanovna tried to think of something else—but in vain.</p>
				<p>She suddenly paused, pale and agitated.</p>
				<p>"Well, it's a shadow, a shadow!" she exclaimed aloud, stamping her foot with a strange irritation, "what of it?"</p>
				<p>Then all at once she reflected that it was stupid to make a fuss and to stamp her feet, and she became quiet.</p>
				<p>She approached the mirror. Her face was; paler than usual, and her lips quivered with a kind of strange hate.</p>
				<p>"It's nerves," she thought; "I must take myself in hand."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-13" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h3>
				<p>Twilight was falling. Volodya grew pensive.</p>
				<p>"Let's go for a stroll, Volodya," said his mother.</p>
				<p>But in the street there were also shadows everywhere, mysterious, elusive evening shadows; and they whispered in Volodya's ear something that was familiar and infinitely sad.</p>
				<p>In the clouded sky two or three stars looked out, and they seemed equally distant and equally strange to Volodya and to the shadows that surrounded him.</p>
				<p>"Mamma," he said, oblivious of the fact that he had interrupted her as she was telling him something, "what a pity that it is impossible to reach those stars."</p>
				<p>His mother looked up at the sky and answered: "I don't see that it's necessary. Our place is on earth. It is better for us here. It's quite another thing there."</p>
				<p>"How faintly they glimmer! They ought to be glad of it."</p>
				<p>"Why?"</p>
				<p>"If they shone more strongly they would cast shadows."</p>
				<p>"Oh, Volodya, why do you think only of shadows?"</p>
				<p>"I didn't mean to, mamma," said Volodya in a penitent voice.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-14" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h3>
				<p>Volodya worked harder than ever at his lessons; he was afraid to hurt his mother by being lazy. But he employed all his invention in grouping the objects on his table in a way that would produce new and ever more fantastic shadows. He put this here and that there—anything that came to his hands—and he rejoiced when outlines appeared on the white wall that his mind could grasp. There was an intimacy between him and these shadowy outlines, and they were very dear to him. They were not dumb, they spoke to him, and Volodya understood their inarticulate speech.</p>
				<p>He understood why the dejected wayfarer murmured as he wandered upon the long road, the autumn wetness under his feet, a stick in his trembling hand, a knapsack on his bowed back.</p>
				<p>He understood why the snow-covered forest, its boughs crackling with frost, complained, as it stood sadly dreaming in the winter stillness; and he understood why the lonely crow cawed on the old oak, and why the bustling squirrel looked sadly out of its tree-hollow.</p>
				<p>He understood why the decrepit and homeless old beggar-women sobbed in the dismal autumn wind, as they shivered in their rags in the crowded graveyard, among the crumbling crosses and the hopelessly black tombs.</p>
				<p>There was self-forgetfulness in this, and also tormenting woe!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-15" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h3>
				<p>Volodya's mother observed that he continued to play.</p>
				<p>She said to him after dinner: "At least, you might get interested in something else."</p>
				<p>"In what?"</p>
				<p>"You might read."</p>
				<p>"No sooner do I begin to read than I want to cast shadows."</p>
				<p>"If you'd only try something else—say soap-bubbles."</p>
				<p>Volodya smiled sadly.</p>
				<p>"No sooner do the bubbles fly up than the shadows follow them on the wall."</p>
				<p>"Volodya, unless you take care your nerves will be shattered. Already you have grown thinner because of this."</p>
				<p>"Mamma, you exaggerate."</p>
				<p>"No, Volodya.... Don't I know that you've begun to sleep badly and to talk nonsense in your sleep. Now, just think, suppose you die!"</p>
				<p>"What are you saying!"</p>
				<p>"God forbid, but if you go mad, or die, I shall suffer horribly."</p>
				<p>Volodya laughed and threw himself on his mother's neck.</p>
				<p>"Mamma dear, I shan't die. I won't do it again."</p>
				<p>She saw that he was crying now.</p>
				<p>"That will do," she said. "God is merciful. Now you see how nervous you are. You're laughing and crying at the same time."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-16" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
				<p>Volodya's mother began to look at him with careful and anxious eyes. Every trifle now agitated her.</p>
				<p>She noticed that Volodya's head was somewhat asymmetrical: his one ear was higher than the other, his chin slightly turned to one side. She looked in the mirror, and further remarked that Volodya had inherited this too from her.</p>
				<p>"It may be," she thought, "one of the characteristics of unfortunate heredity—degeneration; in which case where is the root of the evil? Is it my fault or his father's?"</p>
				<p>Eugenia Stepanovna recalled her dead husband. He was a most kind-hearted and most lovable man, somewhat weak-willed, with rash impulses. He was by nature a zealot and a mystic, and he dreamt of a social Utopia, and went among the people. He had been rather given to tippling the last years of his life.</p>
				<p>He died young; he was but thirty-five years old.</p>
				<p>Volodya's mother even took her boy to the doctor and described his symptoms. The doctor, a cheerful young man, listened to her, then laughed and gave counsel concerning diet and way of life, throwing in a few witty remarks; he wrote out a prescription in a happy, off-hand way, and he added playfully, with a slap on Volodya's shoulder: "But the very best medicine would be—a birch."</p>
				<p>Volodya's mother felt the affront deeply, but she followed all the rest of the instructions faithfully.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
				<p>Volodya was sitting in his class. He felt depressed. He listened inattentively.</p>
				<p>He raised his eyes. A shadow was moving along the ceiling near the front wall. Volodya observed that it came in through the first window. To begin with it fell from the window toward the centre of the class-room, but later it started forward rather quickly away from Volodya—evidently some one was walking in the street, just by the window. While this shadow was still moving another shadow came through the second window, falling, as did the first one, toward the back wall, but later it began to turn quickly toward the front wall. The same thing happened at the third and the fourth windows; the shadows fell in the class-room on the ceiling, and in the degree that the passer-by moved forward they retreated backward.</p>
				<p>"This," thought Volodya, "is not at all the same as in an open place, where the shadow follows the man; when the man goes forward, the shadow glides behind, and other shadows again meet him in the front."</p>
				<p>Volodya turned his eyes on the gaunt figure of the tutor. His callous, yellow face annoyed Volodya. He looked for his shadow and found it on the wall, just behind the tutor's chair. The monstrous shape bent over and rocked from side to side, but it had neither a yellow face nor a malignant smile, and Volodya looked at it with joy. His thoughts scampered off somewhere far away, and he heard not a single thing of what was being said.</p>
				<p>"Lovlev!" His tutor called his name.</p>
				<p>Volodya rose, as was the custom, and stood looking stupidly at the tutor. He had such an absent look that his companions tittered, while the tutor's face assumed a critical expression.</p>
				<p>Volodya heard the tutor attack him with sarcasm and abuse. He trembled from shame and from weakness. The tutor announced that he would give Volodya "one" for his ignorance and his inattention, and he asked him to sit down.</p>
				<p>Volodya smiled in a dull way, and tried to think what had happened to him.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-18" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h3>
				<p>The "one" was the first in Volodya's life! It made him feel rather strange.</p>
				<p>"Lovlev!" his comrades taunted him, laughing and nudging him, "you caught it that time! Congratulations!"</p>
				<p>Volodya felt awkward. He did not yet know how to behave in these circumstances.</p>
				<p>"What if I have," he answered peevishly, "what business is it of yours?"</p>
				<p>"Lovlev!" the lazy Snegirev shouted, "our regiment has been reinforced!"</p>
				<p>His first "one"! And he had yet to tell his mother.</p>
				<p>He felt ashamed and humiliated. He felt as though he bore in the knapsack on his back a strangely heavy and awkward burden—the "one" stuck clumsily in his consciousness and seemed to fit in with nothing else in his mind.</p>
				<p>"One"!</p>
				<p>He could not get used to the thought about the "one," and yet could not think of anything else. When the policeman, who stood near the school, looked at him with his habitual severity Volodya could not help thinking: "What if you knew that I've received 'one'!"</p>
				<p>It was all so awkward and so unusual. Volodya did not know how to hold his head and where to put his hands; there was uneasiness in his whole bearing.</p>
				<p>Besides, he had to assume a care-free look before his comrades and to talk of something else!</p>
				<p>His comrades! Volodya was convinced that they were all very glad because of his "one."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-19" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h3>
				<p>Volodya's mother looked at the "one" and turned her uncomprehending eyes on her son. Then again she glanced at the report and exclaimed quietly:</p>
				<p>"Volodya!"</p>
				<p>Volodya stood before her, and he felt intensely small. He looked at the folds of his mother's dress and at his mother's pale hands; his trembling eyelids were conscious of her frightened glances fixed upon them.</p>
				<p>"What's this?" she asked.</p>
				<p>"Don't you worry, mamma," burst out Volodya suddenly; "after all, it's my first!"</p>
				<p>"Your first!"</p>
				<p>"It may happen to any one. And really it was all an accident."</p>
				<p>"Oh, Volodya, Volodya!"</p>
				<p>Volodya began to cry and to rub his tears, child-like, over his face with the palm of his hand.</p>
				<p>"Mamma darling, don't be angry," he whispered.</p>
				<p>"That's what comes of your shadows," said his mother.</p>
				<p>Volodya felt the tears in her voice. His heart was touched. He glanced at his mother. She was crying. He turned quickly toward her.</p>
				<p>"Mamma, mamma," he kept on repeating, while kissing her hands, "I'll drop the shadows, really I will."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-20" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h3>
				<p>Volodya made a strong effort of the will and refrained from the shadows, despite strong temptation. He tried to make amends for his neglected lessons.</p>
				<p>But the shadows beckoned to him persistently. In vain he ceased to invite them with his fingers, in vain he ceased to arrange objects that would cast a new shadow on the wall; the shadows themselves surrounded him—they were unavoidable, importunate shadows.</p>
				<p>Objects themselves no longer interested Volodya, he almost ceased to see them; all his attention was centred on their shadows.</p>
				<p>When he was walking home and the sun happened to peep through the autumn clouds, as through smoky vestments, he was overjoyed because there was everywhere an awakening of the shadows.</p>
				<p>The shadows from the lamplight hovered near him in the evening at home.</p>
				<p>The shadows were everywhere. There were the sharp shadows from the flames, there were the fainter shadows from diffused daylight. All of them crowded toward Volodya, recrossed each other, and enveloped him in an unbreakable network.</p>
				<p>Some of the shadows were incomprehensible, mysterious; others reminded him of something, suggested something. But there were also the beloved, the intimate, the familiar shadows; these Volodya himself, however casually, sought out and caught everywhere from among the confused wavering of the others, the more remote shadows. But they were sad, these beloved, familiar shadows.</p>
				<p>Whenever Volodya found himself seeking these shadows his conscience tormented him, and he went to his mother to make a clean breast of it.</p>
				<p>Once it happened that Volodya could not conquer his temptation. He stood up close to the wall and made a shadow of the bull. His mother found him.</p>
				<p>"Again!" she exclaimed angrily. "I really shall have to ask the director to put you into the small room."</p>
				<p>Volodya flushed violently and answered morosely: "There is a wall there also. The walls are everywhere."</p>
				<p>"Volodya," exclaimed his mother sorrowfully, "what are you saying!"</p>
				<p>But Volodya already repented of his rudeness, and he was crying.</p>
				<p>"Mamma, I don't know myself what's happening to me!"</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-21" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h3>
				<p>Volodya's mother had not yet conquered her superstitious dread of shadows. She began very often to think that she, like Volodya, was losing herself in the contemplation of shadows. Then she tried to comfort herself.</p>
				<p>"What stupid thoughts!" she said. "Thank God, all will pass happily; he will be like this a little while, then he will stop."</p>
				<p>But her heart trembled with a secret fear, and her thought, frightened of life persistently ran to meet approaching sorrows.</p>
				<p>She began in the melancholy moments of waking to examine her soul, and all her life would pass before her; she saw its emptiness, its futility, and its aimlessness. It seemed but a senseless glimmer of shadows, which merged in the denser twilight.</p>
				<p>"Why have I lived?" she asked herself. "Was it for my son? But why? That he too shall become a prey to shadows, a maniac with a narrow horizon, chained to his illusions, to restless appearances upon a lifeless wall? And he too will enter upon life, and he will make of life a chain of impressions, phantasmic and futile, like a dream."</p>
				<p>She sat down in the armchair by the window, and she thought and thought. Her thoughts were bitter, oppressive. She began, in her despair, to wring her beautiful white hands.</p>
				<p>Then her thoughts wandered. She looked at her outstretched hands, and began to imagine what sort of shapes they would cast on the wall in their present attitude. She suddenly paused and jumped up from her chair in fright.</p>
				<p>"My God!" she exclaimed. "This is madness."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-22" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h3>
				<p>She watched Volodya at dinner.</p>
				<p>"How pale and thin he has grown," she said to herself, "since the unfortunate little book fell into his hands. He's changed entirely—in character and in everything else. It is said that character changes before death. What if he dies? But no, no. God forbid!"</p>
				<p>The spoon trembled in her hand. She looked up at the ikon with timid eyes.</p>
				<p>"Volodya, why don't you finish your soup?" she asked, looking frightened.</p>
				<p>"I don't feel like it, mamma."</p>
				<p>"Volodya, darling, do as I tell you; it is bad for you not to eat your soup."</p>
				<p>Volodya gave a tired smile and slowly finished his soup. His mother had filled his plate fuller than usual. He leant back in his chair and was on the point of saying that the soup was not good. But his mother's worried look restrained him, and he merely smiled weakly.</p>
				<p>"And now I've had enough," he said.</p>
				<p>"Oh no, Volodya, I have all your favourite dishes to-day."</p>
				<p>Volodya sighed sadly. He knew that when his mother spoke of his favourite dishes it meant that she would coax him to eat. He guessed that even after tea his mother would prevail upon him, as she did the day before, to eat meat.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-23" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
				<p>In the evening Volodya's mother said to him: "Volodya dear, you'll waste your time again; perhaps you'd better keep the door open!"</p>
				<p>Volodya began his lessons. But he felt vexed because the door had been left open at his back, and because his mother went past it now and theft.</p>
				<p>"I cannot go on like this," he shouted, moving his chair noisily. "I cannot do anything when the door is wide open."</p>
				<p>"Volodya, is there any need to shout so?" his mother reproached him softly.</p>
				<p>Volodya already felt repentant, and he began to cry.</p>
				<p>"Don't you see, Volodenka, that I'm worried about you, and that I want to save you from your thoughts."</p>
				<p>"Mamma, sit here with me," said Volodya.</p>
				<p>His mother took a book and sat down at Volodya's table. For a few minutes Volodya worked calmly. But gradually the presence of his mother began to annoy him.</p>
				<p>"I'm being watched just like a sick man," he thought spitefully.</p>
				<p>His thoughts were constantly interrupted, and he was biting his lips. His mother remarked this at last, and she left the room.</p>
				<p>But Volodya felt no relief. He was tormented with regret at showing his impatience. He tried to go on with his work but he could not. Then he went to his mother.</p>
				<p>"Mamma, why did you leave me?" he asked timidly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-24" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h3>
				<p>It was the eve of a holiday. The little image-lamps burned before the ikons.</p>
				<p>It was late and it was quiet. Volodya's mother was not asleep. In the mysterious dark of her bedroom she fell on her knees, she prayed and she wept, sobbing out now and then like a child.</p>
				<p>Her braids of hair trailed upon her white dress; her shoulders trembled. She raised her hands to her breast in a praying posture, and she looked with tearful eyes at the ikon. The image-lamp moved almost imperceptibly on its chains with her passionate breathing. The shadows rocked, they crowded in the corners, they stirred behind the reliquary, and they murmured mysteriously. There was a hopeless yearning in their murmurings and an incomprehensible sadness in their wavering movements.</p>
				<p>At last she rose, looking pale, with strange, widely dilated eyes, and she reeled slightly on her benumbed legs.</p>
				<p>She went quietly to Volodya. The shadows surrounded her, they rustled softly behind her back, they crept at her feet, and some of them, as fine as the threads of a spider's web, fell upon her shoulders and, looking into her large eyes, murmured incomprehensibly.</p>
				<p>She approached her son's bed cautiously. His face was pale in the light of the image-lamp. Strange, sharp shadows lay upon him. His breathing was inaudible; he slept so tranquilly that his mother was frightened.</p>
				<p>She stood there in the midst of the vague shadows, and She felt upon her the breath of vague fears.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-25" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>The high vaults of the church were dark and mysterious. The evening chants rose toward these vaults and resounded there with an exultant sadness. The dark images, lit up by the yellow flickers of wax candles, looked stern and mysterious. The warm breathing of the wax and of the incense filled the air with lofty sorrow.</p>
				<p>Eugenia Stepanovna placed a candle before the ikon of the Mother of God. Then she knelt down. But her prayer was distraught.</p>
				<p>She looked at her candle. Its flame wavered. The shadows from the candles fell on Eugenia Stepanovna's black dress and on the floor, and rocked unsteadily. The shadows hovered on the walls of the church and lost themselves in the heights between the dark vaults, where the exultant, sad songs resounded.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-26" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h3>
				<p>It was another night.</p>
				<p>Volodya awoke suddenly. The darkness enveloped him, and it stirred without sound. He freed his hands, then raised them, and followed their movements with his eyes. He did not see his hands in the darkness, but he imagined that he saw them wanly stirring before him. They were dark and mysterious, and they held in them the affliction and the murmur of lonely yearning.</p>
				<p>His mother also did not sleep; her grief tormented her. She lit a candle and went quietly toward her son's room to see how he slept. She opened the door noiselessly and looked timidly at Volodya's bed.</p>
				<p>A streak of yellow light trembled on the wall and intersected Volodya's red bed-cover. The lad stretched his arms toward the light and, with a beating heart, followed the shadows. He did not even ask himself where the light came from. He was wholly obsessed by the shadows. His eyes were fixed on the wall, and there was a gleam of madness in them.</p>
				<p>The streak of light broadened, the shadows moved in a startled way; they were morose and hunch-backed, like homeless, roaming women who were hurrying to reach somewhere with old burdens that dragged them down.</p>
				<p>Volodya's mother, trembling with fright, approached the bed and quietly aroused her son.</p>
				<p>"Volodya!"</p>
				<p>Volodya came to himself. For some seconds he glanced at his mother with large eyes, then he shivered from head to foot and, springing out of bed, fell at his mother's feet, embraced her knees, and wept.</p>
				<p>"What dreams, you do dream, Volodya!" exclaimed his mother sorrowfully.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-27" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h3>
				<p>"Volodya," said his mother to him at breakfast, "you must stop it, darling; you; will become a wreck if you spend your nights also with the shadows."</p>
				<p>The pale lad lowered his head in dejection. His lips quivered nervously.</p>
				<p>"I'll tell you what we'll do," continued his mother. "Perhaps we had better play a little while together with the shadows each evening, and then we will study your lessons. What do you say?"</p>
				<p>Volodya grew somewhat animated.</p>
				<p>"Mamma, you're a darling!" he said shyly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-28" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVIII</h3>
				<p>In the street Volodya felt drowsy and timid. The fog was spreading; it was cold and dismal. The outlines of the houses looked strange in the mist. The morose, human silhouettes moved through the filmy atmosphere like ominous, unkindly shadows. Everything seemed so intensely unreal. The cab-horse, which stood drowsily at the street-crossing, appeared like a huge fabulous beast.</p>
				<p>The policeman gave Volodya a hostile look. The crow on the low roof foreboded sorrow in Volodya's ear. But sorrow was already in his heart; it made him sad to note how everything was hostile to him.</p>
				<p>A small dog with an unhealthy coat barked at him from behind a gate and Volodya felt a strange depression. And the urchins of the street seemed ready to laugh at him and to humiliate him.</p>
				<p>In the past he would have settled scores with them as they deserved, but now fear lived in his breast; it robbed his arms of their strength and caused them to hang by his sides.</p>
				<p>When Volodya returned home Praskovya opened the door to him, and she looked at him with moroseness and hostility. Volodya felt uneasy. He quickly went into the house, and refrained from looking at Praskovya's depressing face again.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-29" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIX</h3>
				<p>His mother was sitting alone. It was twilight, and she felt sad.</p>
				<p>A light suddenly glimmered somewhere.</p>
				<p>Volodya ran in, animated, cheerful, and with large, somewhat wild eyes.</p>
				<p>"Mamma, the lamp has been lit; let's play a little."</p>
				<p>She smiled and followed Volodya.</p>
				<p>"Mamma, I've thought of a new figure," said Volodya excitedly, as he placed the lamp in the desired position. "Look.... Do you see? This is the steppe, covered with snow, and the snow falls—a regular storm."</p>
				<p>Volodya raised his hands and arranged them.</p>
				<p>"Now look, here is an old man, a wayfarer. He is up to his knees in snow. It is difficult to walk. He is alone. It is an open field. The village is far away. He is tired, he is cold; it is terrible. He is all bent—he's such an old man."</p>
				<p>Volodya's mother helped him with his fingers.</p>
				<p>"Oh!" exclaimed Volodya in great joy.</p>
				<p>"The wind is tearing his cap off, it is blowing his hair loose, it has thrown him in the snow. The drifts are getting higher. Mamma, mamma, do you hear?"</p>
				<p>"It's a blinding storm."</p>
				<p>"And he?"</p>
				<p>"The old man?"</p>
				<p>"Do you hear, he is moaning?"</p>
				<p>"Help!"</p>
				<p>Both of them, pale, were looking at the wall. Volodya's hands shook, the old man fell.</p>
				<p>His mother was the first to arouse herself.</p>
				<p>"And now it's time to work," she said.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-30" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXX</h3>
				<p>It was morning. Volodya's mother was alone. Rapt in her confused, dismal thoughts, she was walking from one room to another. Her shadow outlined itself vaguely on the white door in the light of the mist-dimmed sun. She stopped at the door and lifted her arm with a large, curious movement. The shadow on the door wavered and began to murmur something familiar and sad. A strange feeling, of comfort came over Eugenia Stepanovna as she stood, a wild smile on her face, before the door and moved both her hands, watching the trembling shadows.</p>
				<p>Then she heard Praskovya coming, and she realized that she was doing an absurd thing. Once more she felt afraid and sad.</p>
				<p>"We ought to make a change," she thought, "and go elsewhere, somewhere farther away, to a new atmosphere. We must run away from here, simply run away!"</p>
				<p>And suddenly she remembered Volodya's words: "There is a wall there also. The walls are everywhere."</p>
				<p>"There is nowhere to run!"</p>
				<p>In her despair she wrung her pale, beautiful hands.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="light-and-shadows-31" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXXI</h3>
				<p>It was evening.</p>
				<p>A lighted lamp stood on the floor in Volodya's room. Just behind it, near the wall, sat Volodya and his mother. They were looking at the wall and were making strange movements with their hands.</p>
				<p>Shadows stirred and trembled upon the wall.</p>
				<p>Volodya and his mother understood them. Both were smiling sadly and were saying weird and impossible things to each other. Their faces were peaceful and their eyes looked clear; their joyousness was hopelessly sorrowful and their sorrow was wildly joyous.</p>
				<p>In their eyes was a glimmer of madness, blessed madness.</p>
				<p>The night was descending upon them.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
