<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Smile</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-smile" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Smile</h2>
			<section id="the-smile-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Some fifteen boys and girls and several young men and women had gathered in the garden belonging to the Semiboyarinov cottage to celebrate the birthday of one of the sons of the house, Lesha by name, a student of the second class. Lesha’s birthday was made indeed an occasion for bringing eligible young men to the house for his grown sisters’ sake.</p>
				<p>All were merry and smiling⁠—the older members of the party as well as the young boys and girls, who ran up and down the yellow sand of the well-kept footpaths; a pale, unimpressive boy, who was sitting alone on a bench under a lilac bush and looking silently at the other boys, was also smiling. His loneliness, his silence, and his well-worn though clean clothes, all pointed to his poverty and to his embarrassment in the company of these lively, well-dressed children. His face was timid and thin, his chest sunken, and his lean hands lay so meekly that it aroused one’s pity to look at him. Still, he smiled; but even his smile seemed pitiful; it was as though it depressed him to watch the games and the happiness of other children, or as though he were afraid to annoy others by his sad looks and his poor dress.</p>
				<p>He was called Grisha Igumnov. His father had died not long ago; Grisha’s mother occasionally sent her son to her rich relatives with whom he always felt depressed and uneasy.</p>
				<p>“Why do you sit alone? Get up and run about!” said the blue-eyed Lydochka Semiboyarinov as she passed him.</p>
				<p>Grisha did not dare to disobey; his heart beat violently, his face became covered with small beads of perspiration. He approached the happy, red-cheeked boys timidly. They looked at him unfriendlily as at a stranger, and Grisha himself felt at once that he was not like them: he could not speak so boldly and so loudly; and he had neither such yellow boots, nor such a round little cap with a woolly red visor turned jauntily upwards as the boy nearest to him had.</p>
				<p>The boys continued to talk among themselves as though there were no Grisha. Grisha stood near them in an uneasy pose; his thin shoulders stooped somewhat, his slender fingers held fast to his narrow girdle, and he smiled timidly. He did not know what to do, and in his confusion did not hear what the lively boys were saying. They finished their conversation and scattered suddenly. Grisha, his timid, guilty smile still on his face, walked back uneasily on the sandy path and sat down once more on the bench. He was ashamed because he had walked up to the boys, yet had not spoken to anyone, and because nothing had come of it. As he sat down he looked timidly round him⁠—no one paid him the slightest attention, and no one laughed at him. Grisha grew calm.</p>
				<p>Just then two little girls, their arms round each other, passed him. Under their fixed stare Grisha shrank, grew red, and smiled guiltily.</p>
				<p>When the little girls had passed by the youngest of them, with fair hair, asked loudly:</p>
				<p>“Who’s this ugly duckling?”</p>
				<p>The elder girl, who was red-cheeked and black-browed, laughed and answered: “I don’t know. We had better ask Lydochka. It’s most likely a poor relation.”</p>
				<p>“What an absurd boy,” said the little blonde. “He spreads his ears out, and sits there and smiles.”</p>
				<p>They disappeared behind the bushes at the turn of the path, and Grisha no longer heard their voices. He felt hurt, and when he thought that he might have to sit there a long time, until his mother should come for him, he was sick at heart.</p>
				<p>A big-eyed, slender student with a stubborn crest of hair sticking up from his high forehead noticed that Grisha was sitting alone there like an orphan, and he wished to be kind to him, and to make him feel more at his ease; so he sat down near him.</p>
				<p>“What’s your name?” he asked.</p>
				<p>Grisha told him quietly.</p>
				<p>“And my name is Mitya,” said the student. “Are you here alone, or with anyone?”</p>
				<p>“With mother,” whispered Grisha.</p>
				<p>“Why do you sit here all by yourself?” asked Mitya.</p>
				<p>Grisha stirred nervously, and did not know what to say.</p>
				<p>“Why don’t you play?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t want to.”</p>
				<p>Mitya did not hear him so he asked: “What did you say?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t feel like it,” said Grisha somewhat more loudly.</p>
				<p>The student, astonished, continued: “Why don’t you feel like it?”</p>
				<p>Grisha again did not know what to say; he smiled in a lost way. Mitya was looking at him attentively. Glances of strangers always embarrassed Grisha; it was as though he feared that they might find something absurd in his appearance.</p>
				<p>Mitya was silent for a while, as he thought of something else that he might ask.</p>
				<p>“What do you collect?” he asked. “You’ve got a collection of something, haven’t you? We all collect: I⁠—stamps, Katya Pokrivalova⁠—shells, Lesha⁠—butterflies. What do you collect?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing,” said Grisha, flushing.</p>
				<p>“Well, well,” said Mitya with artless astonishment. “So you collect nothing! That’s very curious.”</p>
				<p>Grisha felt ashamed that he was not collecting anything, and that he had disclosed the fact.</p>
				<p>“I, too, must collect something!” he thought to himself, but he could not decide to say this aloud.</p>
				<p>Mitya sat a little longer, then left him. Grisha felt a relief. But a new ordeal was in store for him.</p>
				<p>The nurse engaged by the Semiboyarinovs for their youngest son was strolling along the garden paths with the one-year-old child in her arms. She wished to rest, and chose the same bench upon which Grisha was sitting. He again felt uneasy. He looked straight before him, and could not even decide to move away from the nurse to the other end of the bench.</p>
				<p>The infant’s attention soon became drawn to Grisha’s protruding ears, and he leant forward towards one of them. The nurse, a robust, red-cheeked woman, concluded that Grisha would not mind. She brought her charge nearer to Grisha, and the pink infant caught Grisha’s ear with his fat little hand. Grisha was paralysed with confusion, but could not decide to protest. The child, laughing loudly and merrily, now let go Grisha’s ear, now caught hold of it again. The red-cheeked nurse, who enjoyed the game not less than the infant, kept on repeating: “Let’s go for him! Let’s give it to him!”</p>
				<p>One of the boys saw the scene, and told the other boys that little Georgik was obstreperous with the quiet boy who was sitting so long on the bench. The children gathered round Georgik and Grisha, and laughed noisily. Grisha tried to show that he didn’t mind, that he felt no pain, and that he also enjoyed the fun. But it grew harder and harder for him to smile, and he had a very strong desire to cry. He knew that he ought not to cry, that it was a disgrace, and he restrained himself with an effort.</p>
				<p>Happily he was soon delivered. The blue-eyed Lydochka, upon hearing the children’s boisterous laughter, went to see what had happened. She reproached the nurse: “Aren’t you ashamed to go on like this?”</p>
				<p>She herself had difficulty to keep from laughing at Grisha’s pitiful, confused face. But she restrained herself, and upheld her dignity as a grown young woman before the nurse and the children.</p>
				<p>The nurse rose and said, laughing: “Georginka did it quite gently. The boy himself didn’t say that it hurt him.”</p>
				<p>“You mustn’t do such things,” said Lydochka sternly.</p>
				<p>Georgik, unhappy because they had taken him away from Grisha, raised a cry. Lydochka took him in her arms and carried him away to quiet him. The nurse followed her. But the boys and the girls remained. They thronged round Grisha and eyed him unceremoniously.</p>
				<p>“Perhaps he’s got stuck-on ears,” suggested one of the boys, “that’s why he doesn’t feel any pain.”</p>
				<p>“I rather think you like to be held by your ears,” said another.</p>
				<p>“Tell us,” said the little girl with the large blue eyes, “which ear does your mother catch hold of most?”</p>
				<p>“His ears have been stretched out to order in a workshop,” cried a merry youngster, and laughed loudly at his own joke.</p>
				<p>“No,” another corrected him, “he was born like that. When he was very small he was led not by his hand but by his ear.”</p>
				<p>Grisha looked at his tormentors like a small beast at bay, with a fixed smile on his face, when, suddenly, wholly unexpectedly to the cheerful company, he burst into tears. Many small drops fell on his jacket. The children grew quiet at once. They became uneasy. They exchanged embarrassed glances, and looked silently at Grisha as he wiped the tears from his face with his thin hands; he appeared to be ashamed of his tears.</p>
				<p>“Why should he be offended?” said the beautiful, flaxen-haired Katya angrily. “Who’s done him any harm? The ugly duckling!”</p>
				<p>“He’s not an ugly duckling. You’re an ugly duckling yourself,” intervened Mitya.</p>
				<p>“I can’t stand rude people,” said Katya, growing red with vexation.</p>
				<p>A little, brown-faced girl in a red dress looked long at Grisha, and knitted her brows as in reflection. Then she scanned the other children with her perplexed eyes, and asked quietly:</p>
				<p>“Why then did he smile?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-smile-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>It was not often that Grisha’s wardrobe received important additions. His mother could not afford it; hence, every item gave Grisha great joy. The autumn cold came, and Grisha’s mother bought an overcoat, a hat and mittens. The mittens pleased Grisha more than anything else.</p>
				<p>On the holiday, after Mass, he put on his new things and went out to play. He loved to walk about in the streets, and he used to go out alone; his mother had no time to go out with him. She looked proudly out of the window as Grisha walked gravely by. She recalled at that moment her well-to-do relatives who had promised her so much, and had done so little, and she thought: “Well, I’ve managed it without them, thank God!”</p>
				<p>It was a cold, clear day; the sun did not shine with its full brightness; the waters of the canals in the city were covered with their first thin ice. Grisha walked the streets, rejoicing in this brisk cold, in his new clothes, and with his naive fancies; he always loved to dream when he was alone, and he dreamt always of great deeds, of fame, of a bright, happy life in a rich house, indeed of everything that was unlike the sad reality.</p>
				<p>As Grisha stood on the bank of the canal and looked through the iron railings at the thin ice that floated on the surface, he was approached by a street urchin in threadbare attire, and with hands red from the cold. He entered into conversation with Grisha. Grisha was not afraid of him, and even pitied him because of his benumbed hands. His new acquaintance informed him that he was called Mishka, but that his family name was Babushkin, because he and his mother lived with his babushka.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></p>
				<p>“But then what is your mother’s family name?”</p>
				<p>“My mother’s name?” repeated Mishka, smiling. “She’s called Matushkin, because my babushka is no babushka to her, but is her <i xml:lang="ru">matushka.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a></p>
				<p>“That’s strange,” said Grisha with astonishment. “My mother and I have one family name; we are called the Igumnovs.”</p>
				<p>“That’s because,” explained Mishka with animation, “your grandfather was an <i xml:lang="ru">igumen</i>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></p>
				<p>“No,” said Grisha, “my grandfather was a colonel.”</p>
				<p>“All the same it’s likely that his father, or someone else was an <i xml:lang="ru">igumen</i>, and so you have all become the Igumnovs.”</p>
				<p>Grisha did not know who his great-grandfather was, so he said nothing, Mishka kept on eyeing his mittens.</p>
				<p>“You have handsome mittens,” he said.</p>
				<p>“New ones,” Grisha explained, with a joyous smile. “It’s the first time I’ve put them on; d’you see, here is a little string drawn through!”</p>
				<p>“Well, you’re a lucky one! And are they quite warm?”</p>
				<p>“Rather!”</p>
				<p>“I have also mittens at home, but I haven’t put them on because I don’t like them. They are yellow, and I don’t like yellow ones. Let me put yours on, and I’ll run along and show them to my babushka, and ask her to get me a pair like them.”</p>
				<p>Mishka looked at Grisha pleadingly, and his eyes sparkled enviously.</p>
				<p>“You won’t keep me waiting long?” asked Grisha.</p>
				<p>“No, I live quite near here, just round the corner. Don’t be afraid! Upon my word, in a minute!”</p>
				<p>Grisha trustfully took off his mittens and gave them to Mishka.</p>
				<p>“I’ll be back in a minute, wait here, don’t go away,” exclaimed Mishka, as he ran off with Grisha’s mittens. He disappeared round the corner, and Grisha was left waiting. He did not imagine that Mishka would fool him; he thought that he would simply run home, show his mittens, and return with them. He stood there long and waited, and Mishka did not even dream of returning.</p>
				<p>The short autumn day was already darkening; Grisha’s mother, restless because of her boy’s long absence, went out to look for him. Grisha at last understood that Mishka would not return. The poor boy turned sadly toward home and he met his mother.</p>
				<p>“Grisha, what have you done with yourself” she asked, angry and glad at finding her son.</p>
				<p>Grisha did not reply. He seemed embarrassed as he rubbed his hands, red with cold. His mother then noticed that he did not wear his mittens.</p>
				<p>“Where are your mittens?” she asked angrily, as she searched his overcoat pockets.</p>
				<p>Grisha smiled and said: “I lent them to a boy for a short time, and he didn’t bring them back.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-smile-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Years passed after years. The bold and pushing children who once had gathered on Lesha Semiboyarinov’s birthday became bold and pushing men and women, and the urchin who had fooled Grisha, it goes without saying, found his way in life⁠—while Grisha, of course, became a failure. As in his childhood, he went on dreaming, and in his dreams he conquered his kingdom; but in real life he could not protect himself from any enterprising person who pushed him unceremoniously out of his way. His relations with women were equally unsuccessful, and his fainthearted attentions were not once rewarded by a responsive feeling. He had no friends. His mother alone loved him.</p>
				<p>Igumnov rejoiced when he found a position at a small salary, because his mother could live calmly now without worrying about a I crust of bread. But his happiness was of short duration; soon his mother died. Grisha fell into depression, lost his spirits. Life seemed to him to be aimless. Apathy took hold of him; he had no interest in his work. He lost his place, and was soon in great need.</p>
				<p>Igumnov finally pawned his last possession, his mother’s ring; as he walked out of the place he smiled⁠—and his smile kept him from bursting into tears of self-pity.</p>
				<p>He had to see various people and to ask them for work. But Igumnov was not good at this. He was backward and quiet, and he experienced a helpless confusion that prevented him from persisting in his dealings with men. While yet on the stairway of a man’s house a fear would seize him, his heart would beat painfully, his legs would grow heavy, and his hand would stretch toward the bell irresolutely.</p>
				<p>During one of his most depressing and hungry days Igumnov sat in the sumptuous private office of Aleksei Stepanovich Semiboyarinov, the father of the same Lesha whose birthday party remained memorable to him. Igumnov had already sent a letter to Aleksei Stepanovich: after all it was much easier to ask on paper than by word of mouth. And now he came for his answer.</p>
				<p>From the restless, solicitous manner of Semiboyarinov, a small, dry, old man, with closely-cut, silver-grey hair, he guessed that he would have a refusal. This made him feel wretched, but he could not help smiling an artless pleasant smile, as though he wished to show that it did not matter in the least, that he really did not count on anything. The smile evidently irritated Semiboyarinov.</p>
				<p>“I’ve got your letter, my dear fellow,” said he at last in his dry, deliberate voice. “But there’s nothing that I can see just now.”</p>
				<p>“Nothing?” mumbled Igumnov, growing red.</p>
				<p>“Absolutely nothing, my dear fellow. Every place is taken. And I don’t see anything in prospect for the near future. Perhaps something might be done for you at New Year.”</p>
				<p>“I’ll be glad of a chance even then,” said Igumnov, smiling in such a way as to suggest that a mere eight months was of no account to him.</p>
				<p>“Yes, I’ll be very glad to do something then. If it depended upon me you’d get your place today. I’d like very much to be of use to you, my good man.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you,” said Igumnov.</p>
				<p>“But tell me,” asked Semiboyarinov sympathetically, “why did you leave your old place?”</p>
				<p>“They found no use for me,” answered Igumnov, confused.</p>
				<p>“No use for you? Well, I hope we’ll find some use for you. Let me have your address, my good fellow.”</p>
				<p>Semiboyarinov began to rummage on his table for a piece of paper. Igumnov just then caught sight of his own letter under a marble paperweight.</p>
				<p>“My address is in the letter,” he said.</p>
				<p>“So it is!” said his host briskly. “I’ll make a note of it.”</p>
				<p>“I have the habit,” observed Igumnov, rising from his place, “always to write my address at the beginning of a letter.”</p>
				<p>“A European habit,” commended his host.</p>
				<p>Igumnov took his leave and went out smiling, proud of his European habits, which, however, did not prevent him from feeling hungry. He was almost glad that the unpleasant conversation was at an end. He recalled all the polite words, and especially those that contained the promise; foolish hopes awakened in him. But a few minutes later, as he was walking in the street, he realized that the promise would come to nothing. Besides, it was made for the future, and he had need of food now, and he must go to his lodgings with a heavy heart⁠—what would his landlady say? What could he say to her?</p>
				<p>Igumnov began to walk more slowly, then he turned in the opposite direction. Lost in gloom, he walked on, pale and hungry, through the noisy streets of the capital, past busy satiated people. His smile vanished. The look of dark despair gave a certain significance to his usually little expressive features.</p>
				<p>He was now close to the Niva. The huge dome of the Isakiyevski Cathedral glowed golden in the wide expanse of blue sky. The large open squares and streets were enveloped in the gentle, scarcely perceptible, dust-like haze of the rays of the setting sun. The din of carriages was softened in these magnificent open spaces. Everything seemed strange and hostile to the hungry, helpless man. The beautiful, rich-coloured fruits behind the shop windows could not have been more inaccessible if they were under the watch of a strong guard.</p>
				<p>Children were playing merrily in the green square. Igumnov looked at them and smiled. Unpleasant memories of his own childhood tormented him with an intense pity for himself. He reflected that it was only left to him to die. The thought frightened him. And again he reflected: “Why shouldn’t I die? Wasn’t there a time when I did not exist? I shall have rest, eternal oblivion.”</p>
				<p>Fragments of wise strange thoughts came to him and soothed him.</p>
				<p>Igumnov was now on the embankment. He leant against the granite parapet and watched the restless waters of the river. A single move, he thought, and everything would be ended. But it was terrible to think of drowning, of struggling with one’s mouth full of water, of being strangled by these heavy, cold sweeps of water, of battling helplessly, and of at last sinking from sheer exhaustion to the bottom, there to be carried by the undercurrents, and at last to be cast out, a shapeless corpse, upon some coast of the sea.</p>
				<p>Igumnov shivered and moved away from the river. He suddenly espied not far away his former colleague Kurkov. Smartly dressed, cheerful and self-satisfied, Kurkov was walking slowly and swinging a thin cane with a fancy handle.</p>
				<p>“Ah, Grigory Petrovich!” he exclaimed, as though he were glad of the meeting. “Are you strolling, or are you on business?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I’m strolling, that is on business,” said Igumnov.</p>
				<p>“I think we are going the same way?”</p>
				<p>They walked on together. Kurkov’s cheerful chatter only intensified Igumnov’s mood. Moving his shoulders nervously he addressed Kurkov with sudden resolution: “Nikolai Sergeyevich, do you happen to have a rouble on you?”</p>
				<p>“A rouble?” said Kurkov in astonishment. “Why do you want it?”</p>
				<p>Igumnov flushed, and began to explain in stammers. “You see, I … just one rouble is lacking. … I have to get something … something, you see. …”</p>
				<p>He breathed heavily in his agitation. He grew silent, and smiled a pitiful, fixed smile.</p>
				<p>“That means I shan’t get it back,” thought Kurkov.</p>
				<p>And now he spoke no longer in the same careless tone as before.</p>
				<p>“I’d like to, but I haven’t any spare cash, not a copeck. I had to borrow some yesterday myself.”</p>
				<p>“Well, if you haven’t it, you can’t help it,” mumbled Igumnov, and continued to smile. “I’ll simply have to get along without it.”</p>
				<p>His smile irritated Kurkov, perhaps because it was such a pitiful, helpless affair.</p>
				<p>“Why does he smile?” thought Kurkov in vexation. “Doesn’t he believe me? Well, I don’t care if he doesn’t⁠—I don’t own the Government exchequer.”</p>
				<p>“Why don’t you come in sometimes and see us?” he asked Igumnov in a careless, dry manner, as he looked elsewhere.</p>
				<p>“I am always meaning to. Of course I’ll come in,” answered Igumnov in a trembling voice. “What about today?”</p>
				<p>There rose before him a picture of the cosy dining-room of the Kurkovs, the hospitable hostess, the samovar on the table and the various tasty titbits.</p>
				<p>“Today?” asked Kurkov in the same careless, dry voice. “No, we shan’t be home today. But do step in some day before long. Well, I must turn up this lane. Goodbye!”</p>
				<p>And he made haste to cross the wooden walk of the embankment. Igumnov looked after him, and smiled. Slow, incoherent thoughts crept through his brain.</p>
				<p>As Kurkov disappeared up the lane Igumnov again approached the granite parapet, and, trembling in cold terror, began slowly and awkwardly to climb over it.</p>
				<p>There was no one near.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
