<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Wandering Jew</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-wandering-jew" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wandering Jew</h2>
			<p>Sometimes one recalls something strange, something that does not conform at all with events and moods of the day. There is no doubt that a great movement is going on, and one feels the sacred truth of this movement, so opportunely freeing us from the oppressive bonds of stagnant existence. The creative legend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> is beginning to triumph. But one remembers now and then the image of quite another legend, long since created and not at all so blissful. The ceaseless torments of the eternal wanderer Ahasuerus again wounds the heart deeply. You reflect:</p>
			<p>“Surely his soul is at ease by now?”</p>
			<p>The legend has been created by evil people⁠—would not Christ have forgiven? No, it is only men who do not forgive, and so Ahasuerus goes on roaming about the world, assuming various masks.</p>
			<p>I recall a young litterateur, a dear, noble, gentle soul, with a pensive sparkle in his deep, dark eyes. I recall him because it is a long time since I have seen him. He is now in Berlin. About ten years ago he came to me several times during winter. I knew that he lived almost constantly in Germany and he came here only for a short time. I supposed he stopped at an hotel or with friends. But no, it proved that he dared not stop anywhere⁠—though he was a Russian subject he had no right to live in St. Petersburg, just as now many have no right to live in Petrograd.</p>
			<p>When he came visiting in the evening he always had a tired expression on his face.</p>
			<p>“Have you worked hard?” someone would ask.</p>
			<p>“Yes, a little,” he would reply with a smile.</p>
			<p>He always left when everyone else left⁠—and walked all night in the streets of the proud northern capital. He did not even dare sit down on a bench somewhere on the boulevard, in order not to attract the attention of the preservers of order. All night he had to walk from one street into another, now forward, now to the right, now to the left, never turning back, never traversing the same street twice. The magnificent spaces of Peter’s city spread themselves out mightily before the eyes of the fatigued wanderer, and his footsteps resounded echoingly in the silence of dawn.</p>
			<p>He was a Russian subject; though he lived across the borders of his native land, he was proud of being known as a Russian; he was confident that his legal and property interests, in case of necessity, would be carefully taken care of by our diplomats and consuls who are usually so attentive to Russians abroad, and that these interests would not only be looked after by local official favour, but also with all the might, all the dignity of the great empire.</p>
			<p>But here in his native land, in the capital city of his country, this citizen, proud of his nationality abroad, trembled before every policeman⁠—and he spent long nights in walking the streets of our beautiful but sad city. To the sound of the footsteps there responded the stone indifference of paving slabs and cobbles.</p>
			<p>Perhaps this was necessary for some reason? Perhaps if this good and gentle man had passed the night under the roof of a human habitation it would have been to someone’s injury, or someone would have fallen a victim to Jewish violence.</p>
			<p>I don’t know, but I think that the most essential though not the most material interest of the Russian Empire was violated by these wanderings of a Russian subject in the streets of the Russian capital⁠—the interest of Russian dignity, and of the good name of the Russian.</p>
			<p>Two thousand years ago the Apostle Paul bore the proud title of a Roman citizen, and this title sometimes saved him from unnecessary annoyances. Two thousand years are not sufficient for the rights of men to be established everywhere; nevertheless the name of a Russian subject should be respected in Russia as well as beyond Russia’s borders.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
