<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Imprisoned Death</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-bull" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Imprisoned Death</h2>
			<p>In former times there lived a brave and invincible knight.</p>
			<p>One day he succeeded in taking prisoner Death himself.</p>
			<p>He brought him to his strong castle and had him locked in a dark cell.</p>
			<p>Death lay there, in the cell, and people died no more.</p>
			<p>The knight was joyful, and thought to himself:</p>
			<p>“Everything is well now, only we have no peace, because we have to guard him. It would be better to destroy him altogether.”</p>
			<p>But he was a just knight, and could not put an end to Death without a trial.</p>
			<p>So he came to the cell, stopped before the little window, and said:</p>
			<p>“Death, I want to cut your head off. You have done much evil in the world.”</p>
			<p>But Death remained silent.</p>
			<p>Then the knight said:</p>
			<p>“I am giving you an opportunity to defend yourself. What can you say for yourself?”</p>
			<p>And Death replied:</p>
			<p>“I won’t say anything yet; let Life talk for me.”</p>
			<p>And the knight saw that Life was standing beside him⁠—a powerful, red-faced woman, of very ugly looks.</p>
			<p>And she began to utter such evil and sacrilegious words that the brave and invincible knight shuddered and hastened to open the door of the cell.</p>
			<p>Death went forth⁠—and people again began to die. When his hour struck, the knight died, too. But never, to anyone on earth, did he tell what he had heard from Life, the ugly and sacrilegious woman.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
