<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Road and the Light</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-road-and-the-light" epub:type="volume se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Road and the Light</h2>
			<p>On a long country road came people with horses and waggons, and only the stars gave them light.</p>
			<p>The night was a long one, but their eyes were accustomed to the darkness, and they were able to distinguish all the unevennesses and windings of the road.</p>
			<p>But the way being long it became dull for one of the men, and he said:</p>
			<p>“Hadn’t we better light lanterns so as to see the way? Then the horses will move more quickly and we shall get to our destination sooner.”</p>
			<p>The others believed him and lighted lanterns, and not content with that, broke off branches from the trees and made torches⁠—they even lighted bonfires, taking much trouble over the lighting of the way.</p>
			<p>The horses stood still. “Never mind,” said the men, “we shall get on quicker afterwards.”</p>
			<p>And all around them was a bright light, and the light of the stars was darkened. Then the wayfarers saw that there was not one road only, but many side-tracks and by-paths. And each road seemed to some one the shortest road to take.</p>
			<p>They quarrelled among themselves as to which road to take, and they separated. The morning light found them all on different ways and far from the place whither they were bound.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
