<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Wings</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="wings" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Wings</h2>
			<p>A peasant girl was feeding geese, and she wept. The farmer’s daughter came by and asked, “What are you blubbering about?”</p>
			<p>“I haven’t got any wings,” cried the peasant girl. “Oh, I wish I could grow some wings.”</p>
			<p>“You stupid!” said the farmer’s daughter. “Of course you haven’t got wings. What do you want wings for?”</p>
			<p>“I want to fly up into the sky and sing my little songs there,” answered the little peasant girl.</p>
			<p>Then the farmer’s daughter was angry, and said again, “You stupid! How can you ever expect to grow wings? Your father’s only a farm-labourer. They might grow on me, but not on you.”</p>
			<p>When the farmer’s daughter had said that, she went away to the well, sprinkled some water on her shoulders, and stood out among the vegetables in the garden, waiting for her wings to sprout. She really believed the sun would bring them out quite soon.</p>
			<p>But in a little while a merchant’s daughter came along the road and called out to the girl who was trying to grow wings in the garden, “What are you doing standing out there, red face?”</p>
			<p>“I am growing wings,” said the farmer’s daughter. “I want to fly.”</p>
			<p>Then the merchant’s daughter laughed loudly, and cried out, “You stupid farm-girl; if you had wings they would only be a weight on your back.”</p>
			<p>The merchant’s daughter thought she knew who was most likely to grow wings. And when she went back to the town where she lived she bought some olive-oil and rubbed it on her shoulders, and went out into the garden and waited for her wings to grow.</p>
			<p>By and by a young lady of the Court came along and said to her, “What are you doing out there, my child?”</p>
			<p>When the tradesman’s daughter said that she was growing wings, the young lady’s face flushed and she looked quite vexed. “That’s not for you to do,” she said. “It is only real ladies who can grow wings.”</p>
			<p>And she went on home, and when she got indoors she filled a tub with milk and bathed herself in it, and then went into her garden and stood in the sun and waited for her wings to come out.</p>
			<p>Presently a princess passed by the garden, and when she saw the young lady standing there she sent a servant to inquire what she was doing. The servant came back and told her that as the young lady had wanted to be able to fly she had bathed herself in milk and was waiting for her wings to grow.</p>
			<p>The princess laughed scornfully and exclaimed, “What a foolish girl! She’s giving herself trouble for nothing. No one who is not a princess can ever grow wings.”</p>
			<p>The princess turned the matter over in her mind, and when she arrived at her father’s palace she went into her chamber, anointed herself with sweet-smelling perfumes, and then went down into the palace garden to wait for her wings to come.</p>
			<p>Very soon all the young girls in the country round about went out into their gardens and stood among the vegetables so that they might get wings.</p>
			<p>The Fairy of the Wings heard about this strange happening and she flew down to earth, and, looking at the waiting girls, she said, “If I give you all wings and let you all go flying in the sky, who will want to stay at home to cook the porridge and look after the children? I had better only give wings to one of you, namely to her who wanted them first of all.”</p>
			<p>So wings grew from the little peasant girl’s shoulders, and she was able to fly up into the sky and sing.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
